# Diploma-Thesis
Software Tool for Genetic-Algorithm-Based Optimization with Customized User-Inserted Criteria

Running the code on Microsoft Visual Studio will open up an optimization graphical user interface. The user must insert the data required to perform either a maximization or a minimization procedure based on a genetic algorithm.

First, the user must insert the design parameters in the field “Design Parameters”; the names of the parameters must not begin with a number and can only contain alphanumeric values. After declaring the parameter name the user has to choose the type of the parameter, which can be Real Constant, Real Continuous or Real Discrete. Pressing the Add button saves the declared parameter and lists it under the field “Available Design Parameters”, so the user knows the variables he has declared so far. He can also delete a declared parameter simply by choosing it and pressing the Delete button which is located right underneath the parameter list. Next, the user must insert a minimum and a maximum value for the declared parameter in the related fields and press the Assign button. A successful parameter declaration ends with the declared values appearing in the lists called “min values” and “max values” and the corresponding parameter names next to them. At this point the user can declare another parameter by executing the same described procedure or delete some values by pressing the Delete button associated with the minimum or maximum values list or both. Trying to declare values without first having declared a parameter name triggers an error message, prompting the user to set a parameter name.

Moving on with the optimization process criteria, the user must insert the fitness function/objective function of the optimization problem, which has to contain variables that have already been declared in the previous fields. Clicking on the TextBox named “Insert Equation” the user can see a menu with the supported symbols for the successful declaration of the objective function since the parser used is designed to understand specific symbols for executing mathematical operations. Inserting a symbol unknown to the parser or an equation that contains undeclared variables will trigger an error message prompting the user to declare some variable or insert the appropriate symbols. Afterwards, the user has to insert the starting population size for the genetic algorithm as well as the selection percentage in the related fields. The population size must be a positive integer and the percentage must be inserted in the following format: e.g for inserting a 60% selection percentage this is the proper input: “60”. A random number generator creates sets of random values of the declared parameters and organizes them in the form of chromosomes; a chromosome consists of the binary values of the parameter values listed consecutively. The optimization can be performed using a generic method of selection or using Roulette Wheel Selection by clicking on the related tickbox. If the user does not choose Roulette Wheel Selection, the fitness function values of the random chromosomes are calculated and sorted using a bubble sort procedure. The user also has to choose if he wants to solve a maximization or minimization problem by clicking on one of the two tickboxes named “Maximization” and “Minimization”. Clicking on none or both of the tickboxes triggers an error message prompting the user to make a specific choice. Accordingly, the best solutions, which are either the chromosomes resulting in bigger fitness function values for maximization or the ones resulting in smaller values for minimization, are passed on the next generation of the genetic algorithm. The user can insert a Crossover Point and a Mutation Percentage if he is familiar with the length of the chromosomes created in order to customize the procedure. Otherwise, the program chooses randomly these values and performs the optimization process accordingly. During the Crossover operation, the created chromosomes which are not suited to pass to the next generation form in pairs and exchange a bit based on the Crossover point. As for the Mutation procedure, if the user does not insert a mutation percentage the program generates a random small value and picks randomly some of the chromosomes, inverting a random bit in them in order to maintain diversity on the following generation.

Finally, the user has to insert his desired number of iterations for the algorithm and if all declarations of the required values are submitted successfully, pressing the Solve button performs the optimization procedure. If the number of iterations is large enough (>3000) the procedure might take a while. If the user decides he wants to discard all the values and parameters he declared, he can press the Clear button, which empties all the declared fields. A successful completion of the optimization process triggers a message which informs the user about the end of the procedure and creates a .txt file containing the consequent number of iterations along with the corresponding best fitness function value per iteration. Opening this file with Microsoft Office Excel and plotting this file the user can view the results of the optimization process, which constitute of the progression of the fitness function value as the number of iterations increases.

